Table of Contents: 

1.	List of Participants
2.	Abstract
3.	Narrative
4.	Enhancing the humanities
5.	Environmental scan
6.	History of the project
7.	Work Plan
8.	Staff
9.	Final Product and Dissemination 

# List of Participants

Morgann Taylor, a Junior at The University of Richmond
Matt Siegel, a published author and researcher within the food industry
Michael Pollan, a published American Author, journalist, and activist
Naomi Whittel, Shape Magazine CEO
Lauren Tilton, Digital Humanities Professor at the University of Richmond 


# Abstract 
For this project, we will be looking at the progression of fad diets since 1981. We will topic model the covers of Shape Magazine from 1981 until today. Then, we will create a topic model and publish the material on a public website for anyone to view. There will also be a graph displaying the different topics throughout time, including the covers from Shape Magazine. Once all magazines are done, we will then begin adding different advertisements to the graphs as well. This way, we can see the progression of advertising. Once we collect a database of foods within the last 50 years, we will then topic model the packaging of the food labels. This will allow us to create another graph to relate to the topic model of diets. Overall, we will be able to see the history of food and dieting from 1981 until today.  The goal would allow for anyone to see the trends in fad diets overtime and understand how they come and go. By incorporating the food labels, anyone will be able to understand how marketing, not only in magazines but also in food labels themselves, are manipulating the things we think are good for us to eat and those that are bad for us to eat. 

# Narrative

## Enhancing the Humanities 

This project will greatly benefit the humanities in many fields like Health, Psychology, Marketing, and Ethics. Let’s first take a look at the health benefits of tracking and modeling diet trends over the last fifty years. This may be the easiest one to explain since it has to do with diets, but overall, we can begin to understand the claims and trends that many consumers see on a day to day basis when shopping or dining out. Many people tend to believe the newest research and several of those people begin to bandwagon their beliefs, jumping on board with the newest superfood. But what do they really know about their food or these research claims being made. For example, in 1977, the McGovern report, a U.S. government backed report, came out with a report that stated that Americans would soon be facing a new cause of malnutrition within the United States. There was evidence to believe that Americans were eating too much dairy, eggs, meats, and sugars. For the first time in history, there would be a rise in obesity greater than the amount of people undernourished. 
When the report came out, big food industries began to claim the report was false and fought back to have the report changed. The report had originally said that Americans needed to reduce the amount of meat, sugar, eggs, and dairy from their diet. Due to backlash from the food industries, the report was changed. Instead of reporting that people should “reduce” the amount of dairy, meat, egg, and sugar products from one’s diet, the report now states that Americans need to buy products with leaner fats like Reduced fat. This of course increased the production and sale of reduced fat items manufactured by these food industries. 
With the addition of my project, someone would be able to see the trends like “low-fat”, “gluten free”, and many more throughout history. This is not to be biased in any way or persuade someone to eat a certain way, but to simply explain the diets based on their popularity during a certain time and then their replacement by another diet trend. 
By a psychology approach, someone will be able to understand the likelihood of someone buying one of these magazines or products based on their labeling. This has a bit to do with Marketing as well since we are looking at how these magazines and food products are displayed. We will be able to compare a magazine from 1990 to a magazine in 1981, seeing the big bolded letters on the cover, describing the hottest new food trend. We will be able to understand why people are likely to buy into these fad diets. In addition, it has been proven that women are most likely to buy into these fad diets over men. By examining my project, there may be answers as to why women are targeted more than men, or why women tend to be the ones to buy. 
We can see this again by looking at the packaging of products from their brightly colored labels or their inclusion of different cartoon characters. We notice the placement on shelves within a grocery store has been proven to affect which person buys the product. Products that are brightly colored tend to be on the lower shelves, while products without the bright colors and words like “low-fat “and “gluten free” tend to be higher up. This is to entice the buyer. Picture a mother and child walking down the cereal aisle and a child sees Fred Flintstone and immediately calls for his mother to get that cereal, while the mother is looking higher up trying to find the “fat-free” cereal to make her mornings easier and “healthier”. This leads us into the ethical standpoint of this project. 
Is it even ethical to be marketing to children by using brightly colored boxes or by using cartoon characters to advertise food products? If we cannot market to younger children, what is the ethical age to advertise to a specific audience? Also, are the selling of fad diets and financially based research by corporations ethical? Like in the McGovern report, should the food industries been allowed to appeal the report and have the entire report changed? Where do we draw the line in the food industry? The last time there was a huge reform of the food industry was the implementation of food inspections in the early 19th century. And that was after fingers, rats, and many other items were found inside of meat products that were being sold. 
	Long story short, this project will greatly help the humanities field as a whole. It is not limited to one field or not and can be understood by everyone. No matter if that person is a history lover or a nutritionist. 

## Environmental Scan

There are a few other projects which include looking at food trends throughout time, but in a different way. To begin, there is What’s on the Menu? at menus.nypl.org. It is a look at food menus from New York City, dating back until 1930’s. The New York Public Library uses menus that they have on file and creates a registry of all of the menus. It is quite remarkable since some of the menus are hand written and in cursive. The main idea is to transcribe “historical restaurant menus, dish by dish, so that they can be searched by what people were eating back in the day. “

The other project I have been able to find that is similar is “What America Ate” at whatamericaate.org. This is a comprehensive database of cookbooks throughout time. They have actually been able to transcribe the cook books in a way that people are able to search the menus for specific words, similar to What’s on the Menu. 

Both projects are extremely valuable, and there is a chance of working with the creators when taking a look at Shape Magazine. It is quite valuable that we are able to use the above two projects to search for words like “low-fat” or “vegan”. This would allow us again, to create that time line of fad diets throughout history. 
	
## History of the Project

After watching Food Inc. for the hundredth time, I wanted to find out if there was a website available to understand where data about diets come from. I wanted to see if there was a change in obesity rates and the sale of “low-fat” foods. When I started looking for similar projects, I was unable to find any website that had the same concern about dieting. Every day, there is some new superfood or super fruit being found to improve our life or to help cut inches off our waist. But I was curious where these fad diets, like Atkins, began and ended. Growing up, I would always see people selling “Hydroxycut” or “The South Beach Diet” on television. It was the same commercial over and over. A fit woman would appear, wearing pants that were three times her size, validating that these diets work. Each commercial would say “millions sold”. I used to believe that these diets worked and as a child, I did not see that these were diets that we would hear about for a year or two, and then another one would replace it. 

As I grew up, I noticed magazines in the store would always come up with a new special and a cleanse. Food menus started having more options, and I took interest. I began thinking more about the food that I ate and questions where it all came from. This began the idea that there is a plethora of people in this era who are investigating more and more where their food is coming from. People are beginning to ask questions and food movements are happening all over the world. Of course, this means an increase in special diets like veganism or the Paleo Diet, all which should be documented. 

While obtaining my Bachelors in Science, I took a class in digital humanities, teaching me the ways in which we can organize data. While exploring a topic model called Signs at 40, I learned the importance of topic modeling and how it could relate to topic modeling of fitness magazines. See, Signs at 40 looks at articles from Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society. Topic models were arranged to see different topics covered in the articles and it even included the covers of the journal throughout the years. I immediately thought I could apply this to my project. I could finally use fitness magazine covers and begin to topic model the covers. This would allow for me to see how long a diet would be emphasized, helping to create a time line for fad diets. 

Then by using the same idea, I could also include a few pictures of foods from different years, looking at the imagery and the description. Eventually, once enough are collected, I could follow the same topic modeling process and create a topic model for the labels on food products throughout the years. Later, I can create a graph to see how the two correlate. 

## Work Plan

We will begin requesting the covers of Shape Magazine, going back until their very first issue. We will then use Mallet and write codes for the software to begin reading the covers of each magazine. We will then generate a list of all of the words. It is important to clean our data as we may get punctuation and there will be many fonts and graphics used. We will create tidy data including lowercase, no punctuation, and quite a few more rules according to Hadley Wickham’s Tidy Data in the Journal of Statistical Software. Mallet will run programs for us, creating a topic model. Also, we will be using Github to publish our website for the time being. This will help with the costs of the project and help us with any glitches we may have before creating the actual website. Within Github, we will have made a project consisting of our topic model and we will then need to go through and see if our topics make sense. Ideally, we would like 20 topics, but that may have to be altered as we do more comprehensive research with the project. 20 topics would allow us to have a good chance of having 20 different fad diets or trends from all of the issues. Anything more may create topics that will not be helpful. Once the topic model is created, we will then create a graph showing our data and include the covers from each Shape Magazine. By this point, we will be ready to introduce and graph a variety of food items with their included label. Once we have about a 100 food labels, we will be able to perform another topic model, but this time only having 10 topics. We will then correlate the words and overlay that graph with the graph from Shape Magazine. Our website will be ready to launch and anyone will be able to view our topic models and gather information. 

## Staff

We will have a team of about 15 people working on this project, helping to collect data and help to get the project up and running. We will pull students from Loyola’s Digital Humanities graduate program, allowing them to receive credit for their help with the project. Approximately, we will have 10 students from Loyola. We will also have the help of Matt Siegel, a published author to help write for the website and create an easier flow. We will then enlist the help of Dr. Lauren Tilton, who is experienced in Digital Humanities, will help create the codes needed to run mallet. Any other help will be from IT graduates who will help get the project live. 

## Final Product and Dissemination

By the end of the project, we will have created a website with two topic models. The website will be created separate, but any codes that we needed to create to read the magazine covers, we will include in our Github repository. As stated before, we plan to organize our data first in Github to allow for us to continuously change things needed and have a log of all the work that we have done. This will also allow for all of our staff to have access and change things along the way. This is important to us that we allow the public to view our information and we will make sure that our end project is visible for everyone. Anyone with disabilities will be able to hear the text being spoken, however we have not been able to create a graph for them to be able to see if they have a vision disability. However, I will try not to use colors that tend to blend together for those that are colorblind. I will try to stick with either one blue or one green, but not both. Also, some people have trouble seeing purple, so I will be careful with that color as well. We will continue to have open access to our information and our findings. Again, our goal is not to persuade someone to eat one way or another, but to be informed. 


